=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

dlocate - program to view debian package information

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<dlocate> [I<option>...] [I<command>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<dlocate> is a fast alternative to dpkg for queries like C<dpkg -L>
and C<dpkg -S>.

=head1 COMMANDS

=over

=item I<pattern>...

List all records where either the package name or the filename matches
I<pattern>.

Note that dlocate is written in Perl and uses Perl regular expressions, so
regexp metacharacters need to be taken into account or avoided by using
the B<-F> or B<--fixed-strings> option.

Also note that regexp patterns often need to be quoted or escaped
to prevent the shell from trying to expand them.

For example, to search for C</usr/bin/[>, you might try:

  dlocate '/usr/bin/\['

or

  dlocate -F '/usr/bin/['

=item B<-S> I<filename>...

List all records where only the filename matches the I<filename> pattern.

Perl regexp-enhanced emulation of C<dpkg -S>.

Note that dlocate is written in Perl, so regexp metacharacters need to be
taken into account.

For example, to search for C</usr/bin/[>, you need to type:

  dlocate  '/usr/bin/\['

Or use the B<-F> or B<--fixed-strings> option

  dlocate -F '/usr/bin/['

=item B<-P> I<package>...

List all records where only the package name matches the I<pattern>.

=item B<-l> I<package>...

Perl regexp-enhanced emulation of C<dpkg -l>.
Shows all packages which match I<package>.

Internally this searches a file containing the reformatted output of C<dpkg -l>
(four fields separated by tabs; status, package-name, installed version, short
description) so, unlike C<dpkg -l> it will return packages whose version or
short description matches, too.

All searches use Perl regular expressions by default.  Fixed strings can be
used instead by using the B<-F> or B<--fixed-strings> option.

Note that because of the difference between regular expressions and dpkg's
shell-style pattern matching, the output from C<dlocate -l> is occasionally
different to the output from C<dpkg -l>.

This is not a bug, regular expressions are far more flexible than shell
pattern matching. This is the way dlocate is supposed to run, but it
may require some knowledge of regular expressions to get the output you
want.

Regular expressions may need to be quoted on the command line to avoid being
expanded by the shell.

=item B<-k>

List package names of installed kernels and all related packages.

Optionally takes a regexp pattern argument to list only matching kernels.  For
example, C<dlocate -k 6.10>, or C<apt-get purge $(dlocate -k '6.12.(8|11)')> to
purge all kernel-related packages for versions 6.12.8 and 6.12.11

=item B<-K>

Detailed list of installed kernels and all related packages.  Optionally takes
a regexp pattern argument to list only matching kernels.

=item B<-L> I<package>...

List all files in I<package>.

The output order is preserved from the one used by B<dpkg-query>,
which preserves the order from the B<.deb> archive,
where symlinks are provided at the end to guarantee they point to
already unpacked entries in the filesystem.

=item B<-s> I<package>...

Print status of I<package>.

=item B<--ls> I<package>...

C<ls -ldF> of all files in I<package>.

=item B<--lsconf> I<package>...

C<ls -ldF> of conffiles in I<package>.

=item B<--conf> I<package>...

List conffiles in I<package>.

=item B<--du> I<package>...

C<du -sck> of all files in I<package>.

=item B<--md5sum> I<package>...

List md5sums (if any) of I<package>.

=item B<--md5check> I<package>...

Check md5sums (if any) of I<package>.

=item B<--man> I<package>...

List man pages (if any) in I<package>.

=item B<--lsman> I<package>...

List full path/filenames of man pages (if any) in I<package>.

=item B<--lsbin> I<package>...

List full path/filenames of executable files (if any) in I<package>.

=item B<--lsdir> I<package>...

List only the directories in I<package>.

=item B<--changelogs> I<package>...

View the changelogs in I<package> with C<sensible-viewer>.  If combined with
the B<-f> or B<--filenames-only> option will instead output the list of
changelog files in I<package>.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-a> I<architecture>, B<--arch> I<architecture>

Limit search to packages for one architecture.  For example, C<dlocate -L libxcursor -a i386>

=item B<-I>, B<--installed-only>

Show only installed packages in output.

=item B<--zero>, B<-z>, B<-0>

Use NUL-separated output for all commands and options except <B><--du>

=item B<-f>, B<--filename-only>

Only output file names when searching for files.

=item B<-p>, B<--package-only>

Only output package names when searching for files.

=item B<-w>, B<--word-regexp>

Select only those lines containing matches that form whole words.
The test is that the matching substring must either be at the beginning
of the line, or preceded by a non-word constituent character.
Similarly, it must be either at the end of the line or followed by
a non-word constituent character.
Word-constituent characters are letters, digits, and the underscore.

=item B<-i>, B<--ignore-case>

Ignore case distinctions in the I<pattern>.

=item B<-F>, B<--fixed-strings>

Interpret I<pattern>... as a list of fixed strings (with all metacharacters
escaped via perl's B<quotemeta()> function), any of which will match.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Display help message and exit.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Display dlocate's version number and exit.

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose>, B<--debug>

Produce verbose debugging output.

=item B<-c>, B<--columns>[B<=>I<columns>]

Set I<columns> width to override the B<dlocate> default of using the entire
terminal line width.
Any value for I<columns> less than 80 will be increased to 80.

=item B<-C>, B<--colour>, B<--color>

Colourise B<-l> or B<-s> output (requires supercat to be installed).

=back

=head1 FILES

=over

=item F</etc/default/dlocate>

Configuration file with default options. Currently the only option is
to enable/disable gzip or zstd compression of F</var/lib/dlocate/dlocatedb>.

=item F</var/lib/dlocate/dlocatedb>

Plain text listing of all files belonging to all packages.  This file may
optionally be compressed with either gzip or zstd.

=item F</var/lib/dlocate/dpkg-list>

Listing of all packages known to dpkg.

See L<update-dlocatedb(8)> for details.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

To find which package C</usr/bin/[> belongs to:

  dlocate '/usr/bin/\['

To view all man pages contained within the dpkg package:

  man $(dlocate -man dpkg)

To purge kernel versions 6.10.10 and 6.10.11, including -image, -headers and -kbuild
packages.

  apt-get purge $(dlocate -k 6.1[01])

or

   dlocate -0 -k 6.1[01] | xargs -0r apt-get purge

To check the md5sums of the dlocate package:

  dlocate --md5check dlocate

To run C<dpkg-repack> on all installed packages where the package name matches xserver:

  dpkg-repack $(dlocate -I -P -p xserver)

or

  dlocate -I -P -p xserver -0 | xargs -0r dpkg-repack

=head1 NOTES

B<dlocate> does not update its databases (see L<FILES> section)
automatically after new or upgraded packages have been installed with
B<dpkg> or B<apt-get> etc.

A daily cron job is run to perform the update.
Or the root user can run B<update-dlocatedb> at any time to force an update.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item B<COLUMNS>

Sets the number of columns B<dlocate> should use when displaying
formatted text.
Currently only used by B<-l>.
Values lower than 80 are increased to 80.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<dpkg(1)>,
L<update-dlocatedb(8)>,
L<grep(1)>,
L<grep-dctrl(1)>.
